I'd like to welcome to the stage dr.
Siddhartha Mukherjee thank you so much
we do go a long way back Suzan if I
remember correctly you were my chief
resident and if I was not always present
it was because I was doing something
else like writing books so you should
forgive me thank you for this kind honor
and thank you John and Mindy I applaud
the critical work of the Bassett
initiative at the and the Abelson Cancer
Center your commitment to research on
the bracket1 genes in particular and in
cancer genetics in general extends
beyond our understanding of just one
type of cancer and it's very important
to remember that there's a whole domain
of cancers that are likely to be
transformed by this research this
research has already had wide-ranging
implications for many diseases and will
continue to have broad implications in
the future that the journey through
genetics is a personal story for all of
us for me it is my family history of
mental illness schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder the defining questions of my
childhood were to seek answers about why
we're affected by some of these
illnesses why are some of us affected
what and why not others what makes one
person susceptible and not his brother
in a sense it's only app that this
journey would intersect with my
professional life I'm now as many of you
know I'm now an oncologist by training I
also run a laboratory cancer is a
genetic disease at its very core and the
world of cancer has already been
rewritten through genetic research
obviously we are here because our
understanding of the bracket1 gene and
the bracket two genes and the family of
genes that surround these genes is
under transformation research on these
genes has allowed us to identify
patients that have an increased risk for
breast and other cancers and to
preemptively treat these cancers tens of
thousands and soon hundreds of thousands
of lives have been and will be
transformed by these treatments and
diagnostic modalities and as many of you
know we're now entering a narrow and big
questions loom on how to deepen our
understanding of risk how do other gene
variants influence the risk of
developing breast cancer in a woman with
bracket1 gene mutation how or why does
the environment add or subtract from
this risk how can we give the best
advice to women with bracket1 mutations
to manage their care what is the best
therapy if they should develop cancer
and how do we manage the risks in a
younger woman versus an older woman in
the summer of 1983 the doctor writer and
occasional poet Lewis Thomas published
an enormous the influential book called
the youngest science notes of a medicine
watcher if that book had been written
today a more appropriate title might
have been the adolescent science we're
in the midst of a stormy and contentious
transition of a young discipline into
maturity in short we're in the growing
up phase of medicine much of this
growing up has to do with our
understanding of genes and the profound
influence that genes have on our lives
fates destinies and identities when I
was preparing for this talk I went back
to this recent book the gene actually I
wrote this book obviously I didn't know
the work of the vasa foundation I was
surprised at how many times
Braca comes up in this book it comes up
at I when I when I looked through the
index that comes up ten times in in a
book on on the future and the history of
human genetics partly because it's such
an exemplar of the power and the
transformative potential of using
genetics to predict risk so I thought I
would read one paragraph or two
paragraphs about where where this
thinking has gone and how again Rock has
become an exempt
of how we think about cancer risk how we
think about mitigating risk and
potentially how we think about treatment
in the summer of 2008 I met a woman with
a family history of breast cancer
Jane Sterling's a pseudonym was a 37
year old nurse from the North Shore of
Massachusetts the story of her family
could have been plucked straight out of
Mary Claire Kings Case Files this is a
reference to Mary Claire King's work a
great-grandmother with breast cancer at
an early age a grandmother with who had
a radical mastectomy for cancer at forty
five a mother who had had bilateral
breast cancer at sixty sterling had two
daughters she had known about bracket
testing for nearly a decade when her
first daughter was born she had
considered the test but neglected to
follow it up but with the birth of the
second daughter and the diagnosis of
breast cancer and a close friend she
finally came to terms with gene testing
sterling tested positive for the Braca
mutation two weeks later she returned to
the clinic armed with sheaves of paper
scribbled with questions what would she
do with the knowledge of this diagnosis
women with bracket1 gene mutations may
have up to an 80 percent lifetime risk
of breast cancer but the genetic test
tells a woman nothing about when she
might develop the cancer nor the kind of
cancer that she might develop since the
mutation has employed penetrance a woman
with the mutation might develop
inoperable aggressive therapy resistant
cancer at age 30 or she might develop
therapy sensitive variant age 50 or a
smoldering variant at age 75 what should
she tell her daughter's about the
diagnosis some of the women with
mutations hate their mothers one writer
who tested positive herself wrote this
hatred of mothers alone illuminates a
chronic misunderstanding of genetics and
it's debilitating effects on the human
psyche the mutant genes are as likely to
be inherited from her mother as it is
from a father would sterling inform her
sisters what about her second cousins
what about her aren't the uncertainties
about about outcome were compounded by
the uncertainties about choices of
therapy she could choose to do nothing
to wait and watch she could choose to
have mastectomies and or ovarian removal
to
diminisher risk cutting off her breasts
despite her genes as one woman with
mutations described it she could seek
intensive screening with my mama gram
self examinations and MRIs to detect
early breast cancer or she could choose
to take a hormonal medicine which would
decrease the risk of some but not all
breast cancer this shows how far we've
come from her grandmother and her
great-grandmother's case where the
options were limited the capacity to
screen and tell people about their
future risk was extraordinarily limited
the discovery of the draft sequence the
human genome in 2003 was an indisputable
milestone and understanding and yet it
has created many questions as many
questions as it has answered how much of
that human experience is is determined
by the environment what will happen when
we learn to read and write our own
genetic instructions or as john sulston
the biologist put it what will happen
when a machine learns to read its own
manual I'm pleased to say perhaps for
the first time in a public forum that in
2019 filmmaker Ken Burns and PBS will
help further the conversation on
genetics a national conversation of
genetics when they produce a
comprehensive documentary series based
on this second book the gene and
intimate history now we know that there
are devastating diseases for which there
are no answers but we also know with
baraka as an exemplar that there are
cancers that we once thought impossible
to treat or to preemptively diagnose or
screen for and these genetic discoveries
were made in the 80s and 90s and are
coming to life today
immunotherapy yeah the idea that cancers
could resist being killed by the immune
system by activating certain genetics
genetic genetic genetic pathways pardon
me is also an idea that came out of
genetics t-cell trials modified immune
cells are gene therapies that recognize
and kill cancer cells other ideas that
came out of our understandings of
genetics in the last few decades next
year is the 15th anniversary of the
human genome project through it we have
gained moral biological medical and
biochemical lessons we've learned for
instance that genetics sits at the core
of ourselves
our selves and the new therapy is
causing the revolution in how we think
about illness prevention and treatment
but to end I would caution that there
are risks and excesses that are and
there are moral and philosophical
consequences that lie beyond medicine
and science as we explore this new world
of genetics and genomics as the
political theorist Desmond King puts it
one way or another we're all going to be
dragged into a regime of gene management
it will be in the name of individual
health rather than for overall fitness
of the populations and the managers will
be you and me and the doctors and the
state but we must recall that such
regimes of management can drive
fundamental inequalities in our
societies that are already in equal when
one population can access genetic tests
while another population does not get
screened or cannot get screened because
of price we begin to drive deeper rifts
in society and these rifts are not just
cultural or or economic but they become
genetic risks I like to think of the
genome as a massive plea for equality
and equanimity human variation abounds
we know but our genomes are also more
similar than dissimilar we are we are
after all a surprisingly young species
we haven't been around for very long
just three hundred thousand odd years at
tik-tok in evolutionary time so in fact
despite the similarities the genome is a
plea for a kind of radical conception of
human equality as we move forward into a
new era of genetics and genomics it is
this fundamental desire to achieve
equality
despite variation that will mark the new
century of the gene thank you very much
[Applause]
you